---
layout: post
date: 2013-9-07
---

Sometimes, it is easy to think I'm being productive, because I do not have a
lot of free time. These things are not necessarily correlated. Time spent
sorting through unending email eats up too much valuable time and focus. To
counter this, I took some steps to change around my inbox, and the way I
interacted with it.

**1 - stop push notifications (phone)**

This lets me be more effective at whatever I am currently doing, instead of
splitting my attention between a hw set and an ad for discount running shoes.

**2 - reduce incoming mail**

I did this by unsubscribing from the majority of lists I thought were
interesting, but really never interacted with or actually got anything out of.
This helped me not sit idly pandering through unimportant emails, wasting time,
while the sun shines outside.

**3 - &nbsp;separate&nbsp;inboxes**

I use two basic inboxes (gmail allows you to do this under settings -\> inbox),
which shows the unread emails in the top inbox, and the rest below. Usually I
leave this one minimized, reducing clutter.

 ![image](https://31.media.tumblr.com/7d7b6eff9f7f024090749e0065f805e3/tumblr_inline_n3o2t9xxYE1s7hh2w.jpg)

**4 - hide sidebar distractions**

I set all of my labels and chats to hidden, so that it further reduces the
things I am tempted to look at when doing email, and helps me get the replies I
need out of the way quicker.

**5 - only show subject line**

I disable snippets, “important"&nbsp;markers, and everything else besides the
subject line, making it easier for me to comprehend what’s happening and parse
out things I am looking for. This is especially true if my inbox starts to
grow.

**6 - perpetually archive / trash**

If I come to my inbox, I don’t want there to be 1000 unread messages waiting
for me... this is a bit overwhelming, but I see it on some of my peer’s
accounts, where they will just ignore something if it doesn’t matter to them.
if something is unimportant, I will select it (via keyboard with ‘x’, see gmail
shortcuts for help) and then move it to the trash. This makes the number of
unread messages be a useful indicator for how much I actually have to do.
There’s no "Largest Inbox” prize! (….maybe?). As a final disclaimer, this is
just what happens to work best for me right now! It isn't objectively the best,
but it does help me to not spend too much time sifting through mail.

